um the topic I want to talk with you
about today might seem to a lot of you
almost paradoxical in nature a concept
that seems like a
paradox it's how to build a successful
high growth company that can also be
profitable now I have spent you know a
few years now pitching expensify
explaining expensify performance to our
investors first in the private markets
then during our IPO Road show more
recently to our Public Market investors
and expensify is a cash positive
business we're very proud of it we've
had growth and profitability for
something like 5 years now now when I
talk about this with investors every now
and then more often than not before a
little less frequently now I'll get
really curious stairs in the room and
then eventually someone will
ask uh why why would you want to be cash
positive and earlier on that used to
really throw me off because isn't cash
positivity the gold standard like don't
you want your business to grow and make
money but over time I've come to
understand why that question comes up
it's because I think as an industry
we've all kind of assumed that all
profitability comes at the expensive
growth and that all growth is actually
good quality that it is worth pursuing
I'm here to debunk this fallacy for you
and if the slides will move there we go
so this mythical entity this mythical
creature if you will that has high
growth and profitability can be every
one of your companies it's completely
doable and you know what else it's not
exactly uncool to make money because
look at the kinds of companies that have
both high growth and profitability so so
I know I put Ford in here and it's a
really strange example cuz you know it's
not SAS it's a totally different
industry but it is a capital intensive
business and it's pretty incredible that
they could achieve growth and
profitability in a mere five months
right then we have the stalwarts Apple 2
years Google 3 years and Facebook 5
years so you know it is possible to have
high growth if you have a solid product
but at the same time aspire to
profitability in a reasonably short time
frame now I mentioned expensify is a
cash positive business we've been cash
positive for many years now and that's
not something that happened by accident
obviously we've developed a pretty good
discipline and pretty good muscle memory
around how to evaluate growth
opportunities if a growth opportunity is
in front of us is it truly scalable Can
it have meaningful impact and is it
positive Roi and if not is it worth
investing in at the expense of
profitability and then we've also always
had a dual focus on both growth and cost
and process optimization which is what's
helped us achieve profitability pretty
early on in our life cycle and today I
want to take some time to talk through
some of the strategies that are tried
and tested if you will some of the
strategies that really worked for us um
and I hope that they'll help you in your
journey and help you have your cake and
eat it too if you will so with all that
Preamble out of the way let me go
through the strategies one by
one the first strategy is make it a
habit to iterate on your product using
real user
feedback now I think it's pretty obvious
and pretty intuitive if I said in your
growth Journey your biggest Ally is your
product right cuz it's probably your
biggest asset anyway
now if your product just had effortless
growth if it had a word of mouth motion
and momentum then it just automatically
takes care of one of your largest cost
drivers your sales and marketing expense
it's just automatically lowered but for
your product to have that kind of
momentum for it to have that kind of
viral growth if you will it needs to
have a pretty in incredible product
Market fit but incredible product Market
fit is not achieved by simply tinkering
with your product and your user
experience in a lab behind closed doors
it's not even really achieved by asking
your customers what they want
because you'll notice that what people
say they want what they say is
indispensable and what they tell you
about how they'll use a product is just
phenomenally different from how they
actually end up using the product and
from their willingness to try something
versus you know propensity to leave
based on the lack of something is all
diametrically just opposite I want to
tell you a story to try and highlight
this point I want to tell you about how
we built one of our major features the
expensify card so first I just want to
show you our approach to building and
launching major features so this chart
actually shows you over time the
concentrate of the company on building
and launching the cart so all of the
lines you see below the all of the bars
you see below the horizontal line in
faded colors are people that were not
working on the card and all of the bars
in brighter colors on top of the
horizontal line are people working on
the card now you can see something like
up to July 2019 or even August 2019
barely anyone was working on the card it
was just a little pilot team evaluating
the viability of the this product then
between August and
December more or less the entire company
was working on it and then after
December we launched it and had a core
team sort of manage that launch gather
feedback and set the direction on how to
continue iterating on this product this
is in general our approach to launching
new features we assemble a Sprint team
we go as fast as we possibly can so that
we can get something in users hands
because their very real day-to-day usage
will teach you a whole lot and it
actually gives you better Direction in
terms of what's going to really resonate
with your audience now I want to tell
you a specific example a specific
challenge so we launched this thing from
start to finish in 5 months and that was
cool but we couldn't figure out a key
challenge in that small time frame we
couldn't figure out how to support all
of those customers on 30 day balances on
the card because as you can imagine if
you want to support a company for 30
days on a card all of their spend you
need to have some pretty strong Reserve
cash balances sitting in an account with
your processing bank so you got to
figure out how you're going to fund that
we couldn't build everything but also
figure out that pretty critical funds
piece in time so we had one option they
can use the card all of the features are
available but they'd have to pay it off
every day but what was Des desirable so
to speak was the ability to have a
30-day balance it's the norm right like
all of our credit cards also we don't
pay every day so when we did use the
research when we asked our Channel
Partners everybody told us that if you
don't have the ability to do 30-day
balances just forget it cuz this thing
is dead in the water so now we had two
options we could go forward and launch
this with just daily balances or we
could wait figure out how to fund it and
then launch with 30-day balances we went
with the former cuz we finished it so
what's the point in sitting with it
thank God because we launched it in
January 2020 and then with February 2020
and all the coid shutdowns it would take
us a really long time to actually figure
out the funding needs we had to support
30-day balances almost a year if not a
little bit more but what's cool about
this is even during coid where companies
were mostly dialing back spent we
actually saw steady growth on the card
it wasn't through the roof but it
steadily grew in terms of adoption so we
had a lot of real data to play with in
terms of how companies were using it
what they were missing and how do we
build it into their very real everyday
work
flows on the other hand if we' waited it
would have taken us maybe till 2021 to
launch this thing and there was all that
valuable feedback we got along the way
which we would have missed but let me
tell you the most incredible thing of
all daily balances is the default option
even today and if somebody wants 30-day
balances they need to switch to it which
we make pretty easy to do but what we
notice is the majority of companies
never bother to switch but people will
tell you that this thing is dead in the
water if you don't have that feature but
then you give it to them and you know a
meaningful number adopted but by far not
the majority so this just highlights my
point that when you ask someone what
they're going to do they tell you one
thing but never really quite know till
you put something in their hands so as a
message as a takeaway I hope you
get um where I'm going with this is if
you have a product that is good enough
as an MVP put it in your user's hands
because if you wait for Perfection you
won't even really get there because the
way to get from good to perfect is by
using real feedback from real uses based
on real
usage so that's our first strategy
here's our second strategy think about
how you can automate to broaden your
margins now most of you if I asked you
what are the top three cost drivers in
your business you can probably rattle it
off the top of your head right now we're
I think most of us SAS companies here so
I'll take a guess it's probably people
related
expenses and if your product is you know
at all nuanced then a large portion of
that people related expense is probably
support costs that was a very big driver
for our
business so as we grew customers on the
platform there so the number of active
users on the platform grew which was
amazing because that's how our Revenue
grew but for every dollar of Revenue
that we brought in we had to spend
almost a proportional amount on support
because the amount of support volume was
also growing and the only way to stay
ahead of that support volume was to keep
hiring into the support team so you can
see on this slide on the left hand side
the pre- automation kind of trajectory
of Revenue and support costs what was
frustrating about this was for every
dollar in Revenue that we generated we
are spending a comparable amount on
support so what's left behind goes
towards funding all of our other fixed
costs and profitability was like just
ahead of us and we could never quite
catch up with it and that was really
frustrating because that's what we were
trying to do so we decided to automate
this line item and we used AI to do it
not revolutionary at all everybody does
but the way in which we used AI to
automate our support processes is a
little bit different from the large SE
from the majority of the market and I'll
tell you
how most people automate support using
natural language processings they try to
guess at what the customer is asking and
send them to helpful you know help
articles in the hope that they'll
self-service and anybody that is still
not you know self-serviced if you will
will go to a live agent now this helps
because up to a point you'll be able to
take a percent of support volume and
you'll be able to send it to
self-service but what remains will still
go still grow proportional with your
usage so long as what remains is
material and is still growing
proportional to your usage you'll still
never get quite ahead of it and that's
the challenge with it the way we
automated our support processes was
again to use AI we used natural language
processing but we used it not just to
guess at what the customer is asking but
also to guess at the complexity of their
question and then we created these three
tiers if you will the simplest tier
where an answer is nothing but a
multiple choice question the mid tier
where the question is very simple and
you'd have to write a response but it's
so simple that you don't require deep
product knowledge to do it and then the
third tier which was really where we
already been Staffing most of our
support agents was to actually
troubleshoot get into the customers
account work with them to figure out
what the problem was what we noticed was
a huge percentage of questions that
people are asking and this probably
isn't even insightful it's probably very
intuitive a huge percentage of what
customers are asking actually is very
simple or midlevel simple it's not super
complex so all of it went to the lower
tiers and what remained went to the
higher tier but since we were already
staffed up there for the for all of the
volume to start with we never needed to
increase that team size ever again and
then we took the lower tiers that are
super simple and staffed them with
people that really don't need the level
of skill that we were Staffing to begin
with so we were able to dramatically
decrease the costs we spent on those
people because our demands of them were
also very very low as a result we were
able to change the trajectory of our
support cost spent and I think that is
key so you'll see on the chart on the
right it actually changes in terms of
its slope so it still grows but it
doesn't grow with revenue and the fact
that it doesn't grow with Revenue means
that every addition dollar of Revenue
that you make now has a higher chance of
going to your bottom line so finally we
were able to use this strategy to get to
profitability so the takeaway here is
not all of your large cost drivers are
made equal you need to identify a
material costs or material costs in your
books that is going or trending in lock
step with your revenue and you need to
disassociate them in order to see a
broadening of margins and you need to
attack that line item in a way that you
can change its trajectory and that's the
key to
success so that's strategy two moving on
to strategy three how can you use
Outsourcing not for cost savings but for
flexibility which in turn is going to
help you optimize your business for
costs now let's stick with the theme
people costs it's it's a
big not just in terms of the actual
dollar amount but in terms of the amount
of time you spend in keeping up morale
in keeping up um performance so on and
so forth so when you increase your team
size you always have to think about all
of those costs because they will all
multiply
together sometimes it may be a better
strategy to use an Outsource team and
certain attributes lend themselves to
Outsourcing more than others so again
let me tell you a story of how we did it
preco we had so much Word of Mouth
growth that we had an internal sales
team but we never really invested a
whole lot in scaling them out and we
never really thought about scaling them
out before coid now after coid the world
is a little different and late 2021 we
thought to ourselves maybe we could play
with the sales motion a little bit more
and maybe that can help us sort of
bridge some of the Gap in terms of the
volume of leads we're seeing um post
pandemic so we wanted to build a team of
you know cold callers so an SDR team and
then we also wanted to build a team of
what we call onboarding Specialists who
can work one-on-one with the incoming
lead so we can convert them at a higher
percentage and
faster but here's
the challenge we didn't know if any of
this would actually work and we
particularly didn't know if any of this
would be viable for us
because our unit economics are a little
challenging cuz we at least from an
acquisition perspective Ive uh very much
Target a small business so if you have
cold cers and you're paying them even
the most optimal rate it's sort of the
cost of sale kind of gets ahead of you
so a lot of question marks but here's
the thing about these two jobs they are
highly repeatable they're very trainable
and once trained the training doesn't
need to change all that much because
your product isn't changing day and and
day out because of these two attributes
of this particular need we decided to
lean on out sourcing rather than hiring
a full-time
team for 1.5 years or so we tried this
we learned a lot we were able to dial
the team sizes Up and Down based on
cyclicality time zone we were able to
sort of explore offshoring to save on
some costs we experimented with multiple
vendors so we could get some sort of you
know performance optimization and answer
performance related
questions all of it would have been
impossible with with an internal team
because you would have to spend a lot of
time hiring them you can't titrate their
hours up and down you can't really play
around with um their you know you can't
play around with their time zones for
sure so it gave us a lot of flexibility
to experiment and learn in a pretty
short time frame what we learned is in
fact outbound calling didn't quite work
for us from an economical perspective
even if we did it offshore so we Sunset
that team and and we learned that
onboarding Specialists were very very
encouraging in terms of their ability to
convert incoming leads so we we're
leaning more into
that so the moral of this story is if
you're experimenting with ideas if
you're not quite sure about a strategy
but you'd like to try it so long as the
role itself lends itself to Outsourcing
consider Outsourcing before you really
commit and hiring a full-time team
because once you hire a full full time
team there is a softt cost you can't
just let everybody go because your
strategy isn't working that's a huge you
know moral related cost for your company
and is you know no bueno so think about
Outsourcing as a way to gain some
flexibility and
experiment and test many ideas before
you commit to them because once you hire
an internal team you'll end up feeling
stuck with a strategy that might not
completely work for you now having run
through the these three strategies I
want to say that strategies in my
opinion are sort of like ideas they're
cheap and they're dime a dozen not no
two companies are the same so no one
size is going to fit
everybody the secret source that really
brought our strategies together for us
is our small but very powerful
generalist team so when we hire of
course we look for the specific job
skills but on top of it we also look for
these three very special qualities and
we think of it as the ingredients to our
you know unique cocktail if you will we
look for people with innate curiosity
ambition and humility because we think
that that's what makes someone a
generalist makes them sort of like a
stem cell they can identify a problem
they can go to the problem area they can
work with the people that are involved
in that area and they can solve that
problem and that's what really helped us
bring together all of these strategies
in a way that could actually impact the
business now I joined expensify to
manage risk related to payment processes
and Bank Audits and I can assure you
there was no single day in my life that
I woke up and said to myself wow that
would be a dream job I need to go get
that mostly for me it was a foot in the
door and what really motivated me was
finding the next problem and trying to
solve it and working with a wide range
of people I've been at the company8
years I've worked in literally you know
across every team I've worked for sure
with every single person at the company
and I think that really cool creative
ideas come out of a deep contextual
knowledge about the business and not
from any textbook but for somebody to
have that kind of deep contextual
knowledge about your business they need
to be generalists and for them to be
generalists you need to have a culture
that actually nurtures generalists what
I mean by that is you need to have free
flow of information if they don't know
most things they can identify problems
in those areas there needs to be Freedom
so they can go to any area and work hard
and show you results if they're worried
about politics and stepping on people's
toes it's never going to work so think
of your team think of your people as
your strongest tool if you enable them
to be generalists the superstars in your
team will sort of rise to the top and
you'll be able to built a really strong
company with really strong fundamentals
and if you have that there's literally
no storm you cannot weather thank you
for giving me your time I really
appreciate
[Applause]
it